development/004-cicd.md, before:

---
title: Enforce release quality with CI/CD prechecks and build attestation
date: 2025-03-10
status: Accepted
tags:
- #ci/cd
- #security
- #containers
---

## Status

Accepted

## Context

The goal is to ensure the security and integrity of containerised applications throughout the development lifecycle. Threat actors exploit vulnerabilities in code, software dependencies, build tooling, container images, misconfigurations, and exposed secrets.

- [OWASP CI/CD Security Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/CI_CD_Security_Cheat_Sheet.html)
- [ACSC Guidelines for Software Development](https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/essential-cyber-security/ism/cyber-security-guidelines/guidelines-software-development)

## Decision

To address these risks, implement a CI/CD pipeline with the following standardised practices (or similar equivalents) before releasing code and build artifacts to be released via [010-configmgmt.md](../operations/010-configmgmt.md):

- Use [GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/about-github-actions/understanding-github-actions) for CI/CD to **automate building and signing of container images**.
- Use [Justfiles](https://just.systems/man/en/) to **manage development tasks**.
- **Sign container images** with [Cosign](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign) to ensure integrity and authenticity.
- Integrate [Trivy](https://trivy.dev/latest/docs/target/container_image/) for **vulnerability scanning of container images**.
- Implement [Semgrep](https://semgrep.dev/docs/getting-started/quickstart) for **static code analysis** to find common issues.
- Use [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/docs/intro) for **end-to-end testing of web applications**.
- Use [Restish](https://rest.sh/#/guide) for **scripted validation of [REST APIs](003-apis.md)**.
- Use [Grafana K6](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/get-started/write-your-first-test/) for **performance and reliability testing**.
- Align development practices to [ACSC guidelines for software development](https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/essential-cyber-security/ism/cyber-security-guidelines/guidelines-software-development).

## Consequences

If we do not implement these practices, we risk:

- Deploying containers with known vulnerabilities that can be exploited by attackers.
- Exposing sensitive information due to misconfigurations or hardcoded secrets.
- Compromising the integrity and reliability of our applications due to inadequate testing.
- Non-compliance with legislated requirements, leading to potential legal and reputational risks.

By adopting the above baseline for our CI/CD approach, we enhance the security posture of our containerised applications, ensure compliance with best practices, and maintain high-quality software delivery.

Commit message:

Quarto enablement
- Added GitHub Actions for automated deployment
- Updated documentation for current workflow
- Setup quarto

development/004-cicd.md, after:

---
title: "ADR 004: Enforce release quality with Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) prechecks and build attestation"
date: 2025-03-10
status: Accepted
tags:
- #ci/cd
- #security
- #containers
---

## Status

Accepted

## Context

The goal is to ensure the security and integrity of containerised applications throughout the development lifecycle. Threat actors exploit vulnerabilities in code, software dependencies, build tooling, container images, misconfigurations, and exposed secrets.

- [Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) CI/CD Security Cheat Sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/CI_CD_Security_Cheat_Sheet.html)
- [Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) Guidelines for Software Development](https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/essential-cyber-security/ism/cyber-security-guidelines/guidelines-software-development)

## Decision

To address these risks, use a CI/CD pipeline with the following standardised practices (or similar equivalents) before releasing code and build artifacts to release via [010-configmgmt.md](../operations/010-configmgmt.md):

- Use [GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/about-github-actions/understanding-github-actions) for CI/CD to **automate building and signing of container images**.
- Use [Justfiles](https://just.systems/man/en/) to **manage development tasks**.
- **Sign container images** with [Cosign](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign) to ensure integrity and authenticity.
- Integrate [Trivy](https://trivy.dev/latest/docs/target/container_image/) for **vulnerability scanning of container images**.
- Use [Semgrep](https://semgrep.dev/docs/getting-started/quickstart) for **static code analysis** to find common issues.
- Use [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/docs/intro) for **end-to-end testing of web applications**.
- Use [Restish](https://rest.sh/#/guide) for **scripted validation of [Representational State Transfer (REST) APIs](003-apis.md)**.
- Use [Grafana K6](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/get-started/write-your-first-test/) for **performance and reliability testing**.
- Align development practices to [ACSC guidelines for software development](https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/essential-cyber-security/ism/cyber-security-guidelines/guidelines-software-development).

## Consequences

If we do not use these practices, we risk:

- Deploying containers with known vulnerabilities that attackers can exploit.
- Exposing sensitive information due to misconfigurations or hardcoded secrets.
- Compromising the integrity and reliability of our applications due to inadequate testing.
- Non-compliance with legislated requirements, leading to potential legal and reputational risks.

By adopting the above baseline for our CI/CD approach, we enhance the security posture of our containerised applications, ensure compliance with best practices, and maintain high-quality software delivery.
