security/016-edge-protection.md, before:

---
title: "ADR 016: Web Application Edge Protection"
date: 2025-07-22
status: Proposed
tags:
- #security
- #cdn
- #waf
---

## Status

Proposed

## Context

Public-facing web applications require protection from DDoS attacks, application-layer threats, and malicious traffic. CDNs with integrated WAFs provide essential edge protection, filtering attacks before they reach origin servers.

- [ACSC Information Security Manual (ISM)](https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/essential-cyber-security/ism)

## Decision

All public web applications and APIs must use CDN with integrated WAF protection:

**CDN Requirements:**

- Geographic distribution with SSL/TLS termination at edge
- Cache optimization and origin shielding
- IPv6 dual-stack support

**WAF Protection:**

- OWASP Top 10 protection rules enabled
- Layer 7 DDoS protection and rate limiting
- Geo-blocking and bot management
- Custom rules for application-specific threats

**DDoS Protection:**

- AWS Shield Advanced or equivalent
- Real-time attack monitoring and alerting
- DDoS Response Team access

**Implementation:**

- WAF logs integrated with SIEM systems
- Fail-secure configuration (no fail-open)
- Regular penetration testing and rule tuning
- CI/CD integration for automated deployments

## Consequences

**Risks of not implementing:**

- Service disruption from DDoS attacks
- Exploitation of web application vulnerabilities
- Poor performance and user experience

**Benefits:**

- Significant reduction in successful attacks
- Improved application performance and availability
- Enhanced security posture at network edge

Commit message:

Migrate from Quarto to mdBook with link checking and ASCII diagrams (#16)
- Replace Quarto with mdBook for simpler documentation generation
- Add comprehensive link checking via mdbook-linkcheck backend
- Include ASCII diagrams for key workflows (CI/CD, identity federation, infrastructure)
- Configure A4 PDF format
- Simplify commands: just build, just lint, just serve
- Update GitHub Actions workflow for mdBook deployment
- Add SUMMARY.md for manual navigation control

security/016-edge-protection.md, after:

# ADR 016: Web Application Edge Protection

**Status:** Proposed | **Date:** 2025-07-22

## Context

Government web applications face heightened security threats including
state-sponsored attacks, DDoS campaigns by activist groups, and
sophisticated application-layer exploits targeting public services.
These attacks can disrupt critical citizen services and damage public
trust.

Traditional perimeter security is insufficient for protecting modern web
applications that serve millions of citizens. Edge protection through
CDNs and WAFs provides the first line of defense, filtering malicious
traffic before it reaches application infrastructure.

References:

- [ACSC Information Security Manual
  (ISM)](https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/essential-cyber-security/ism)
- [ACSC Guidelines for System
  Hardening](https://www.cyber.gov.au/acsc/view-all-content/publications/hardening-linux-workstations-and-servers)
- [OWASP Web Application Security Testing
  Guide](https://owasp.org/www-project-web-security-testing-guide/)

## Decision

All public web applications and APIs must use CDN with integrated WAF
protection:

**CDN Requirements:**

- Geographic distribution with SSL/TLS termination at edge
- Cache optimization and origin shielding
- IPv6 dual-stack support

**WAF Protection:**

- OWASP Top 10 protection rules enabled
- Layer 7 DDoS protection and rate limiting
- Geo-blocking and bot management
- Custom rules for application-specific threats

**DDoS Protection:**

- AWS Shield Advanced or equivalent
- Real-time attack monitoring and alerting
- DDoS Response Team access

**Implementation:**

- WAF logs integrated with SIEM systems
- Fail-secure configuration (no fail-open)
- Regular penetration testing and rule tuning
- CI/CD integration for automated deployments

## Consequences

**Risks of not implementing:**

- Service disruption from DDoS attacks
- Exploitation of web application vulnerabilities
- Poor performance and user experience

**Benefits:**

- Significant reduction in successful attacks
- Improved application performance and availability
- Enhanced security posture at network edge
