operations/002-workloads.md, before:

# ADR 002: AWS EKS for Cloud Workloads

**Status:** Accepted | **Date:** 2025-02-17

## Context

Organisations want to efficiently manage and scale bespoke workloads in a
secure and scalable manner. Traditional server management can be
cumbersome and inefficient for dynamic workloads. Provider specific
control planes can result in lock-in and artificial constraints limiting
technology options.

- [Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) Cloud Native
  Landscape](https://landscape.cncf.io/)
- [AWS EKS
  Quickstart](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/quickstart.html)

## Decision

To address these challenges, use a [CNCF Certified
Kubernetes
platform](https://www.cncf.io/training/certification/software-conformance/#logos)
with automatically managed infrastructure resources. Due to hyperscaler
availability and size [AWS EKS (Elastic Kubernetes
Service)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/what-is-eks.html)
in auto mode is the preferred option. This leverages Kubernetes for orchestration, AWS
EKS for managed Kubernetes services, AWS Elastic Block Store (EBS) for
storage and AWS load balancers for traffic management.

- **AWS EKS Auto Mode**: Provide a managed Kubernetes service, that
  automatically scales the infrastructure based on workload demands.
- **Managed Storage and NodePools**: Ensure that the underlying
  infrastructure is maintained and updated by AWS.
- **Load Balancers**: Standardise ingress and traffic management.
- **Persistent Storage** Databases and object storage should be DBaaS to enable higher resilience for PITR/backups with lower overheads as per [ADR 018: Database Patterns](../operations/018-database-patterns.md)

## Consequences

**Benefits:**

- Efficient resource utilisation through managed scaling
- Clear boundaries for shared responsibilities with a small operational overhead
- Enhanced security through automatic updates and patches
- Improved availability with managed storage and node pools

**Risks if not implemented:**

- Resource inefficiency from manual scaling
- High operational overhead managing custom infrastructure
- Security vulnerabilities from delayed updates
- Service downtime during traffic spikes

## Strategic Research

Analysis like [Cloud services and government digital sovereignty in Australia and beyond. / Mitchell, Andrew D.; Samlidis, Theodore.](https://research.monash.edu/en/publications/cloud-services-and-government-digital-sovereignty-in-australia-an/) in the [International Journal of Law and Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2021, p. 364-394](https://academic.oup.com/ijlit/issue/29/4) highlights the ongoing issues with depending on hyperscalers in a single foreign jurisdiction. Based on this changing landscape, exploring simplified options for secure sovereign owned hosting options such as [Australian Dedicated Servers](https://www.micron21.com/enterprise/dedicated-servers) and [local colo](https://www.hostingcertification.gov.au/certified-service-providers) in Tier 3+ datacentres (designed for 99.98% uptime) is warranted and touched on below.

### Bare metal management

Use a platform like [Proxmox VE](https://www.proxmox.com/en/products/proxmox-virtual-environment/overview) to run standalone clusters at multiple facilities with multiple 2U servers per location. Example hardware (starts approx $15k AUD per server) - [Dell PowerEdge R7725](https://www.dell.com/en-au/shop/cty/pdp/spd/poweredge-r7725), [HPE ProLiant DL385 Gen11](https://www.hpe.com/au/en/hpe-proliant-dl385-gen11.html), [Lenovo ThinkSystem SR665 V3](https://www.lenovo.com/au/en/p/servers-storage/servers/racks/thinksystem-sr665-v3/len21ts0009)

Year 1 estimated costs:
- Hardware: ~$200k for 6x ~$33k servers
- Colo (2 sites, Tier 3+): [~$50k for 2x 5kw racks](https://www.micron21.com/enterprise/colocation-full-rack-pricing) with 1 Gbit IP Transit
- Total: $250k for ~2-3TB ram, ~500 cores, 100TB disk across 2 sites (reduce by a factor of 2-3 for redundancy)

Commit message:

Improve approachability and update AI/security tooling
README.md:
- Add 'For WA Public Sector Agencies' getting started section
- Direct links to reference architectures with descriptions
- Compliance alignment callout (WA Cyber Policy, ACSC ISM, WA AI Policy)

AGENTS.md (renamed from AGENT.md):
- Add Grug Brained Developer and CNCF/Linux Foundation philosophy
- Focus on Goose as primary AI agent
- Getting started pointers to reference architectures

ADR updates:
- 004-cicd: Replace Semgrep with GitHub CodeQL for static analysis
- 011-ai-governance: Add Linux Foundation Agentic AI Foundation reference
- 011-ai-governance: Add Strategic Research section (ZeroPath under investigation)
- 002-workloads: Add CNCF Kubernetes AI Conformance section for HPC/AI portability

Quality improvements:
- Fix D2 diagram code fences in data-pipelines.md and openapi-backends.md
- Expand glossary with 12 missing terms (DBaaS, ETL, ISM, OIDC, PII, PITR, PKCE, SAML, SBOM, SSO, VMC, WCAG)

operations/002-workloads.md, after:

# ADR 002: AWS EKS for Cloud Workloads

**Status:** Accepted | **Date:** 2025-02-17

## Context

Organisations want to efficiently manage and scale bespoke workloads in a
secure and scalable manner. Traditional server management can be
cumbersome and inefficient for dynamic workloads. Provider specific
control planes can result in lock-in and artificial constraints limiting
technology options.

- [Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) Cloud Native
  Landscape](https://landscape.cncf.io/)
- [AWS EKS
  Quickstart](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/quickstart.html)

## Decision

To address these challenges, use a [CNCF Certified
Kubernetes
platform](https://www.cncf.io/training/certification/software-conformance/#logos)
with automatically managed infrastructure resources. Due to hyperscaler
availability and size [AWS EKS (Elastic Kubernetes
Service)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/what-is-eks.html)
in auto mode is the preferred option. This leverages Kubernetes for orchestration, AWS
EKS for managed Kubernetes services, AWS Elastic Block Store (EBS) for
storage and AWS load balancers for traffic management.

- **AWS EKS Auto Mode**: Provide a managed Kubernetes service, that
  automatically scales the infrastructure based on workload demands.
- **Managed Storage and NodePools**: Ensure that the underlying
  infrastructure is maintained and updated by AWS.
- **Load Balancers**: Standardise ingress and traffic management.
- **Persistent Storage** Databases and object storage should be DBaaS to enable higher resilience for PITR/backups with lower overheads as per [ADR 018: Database Patterns](../operations/018-database-patterns.md)

## Consequences

**Benefits:**

- Efficient resource utilisation through managed scaling
- Clear boundaries for shared responsibilities with a small operational overhead
- Enhanced security through automatic updates and patches
- Improved availability with managed storage and node pools

**Risks if not implemented:**

- Resource inefficiency from manual scaling
- High operational overhead managing custom infrastructure
- Security vulnerabilities from delayed updates
- Service downtime during traffic spikes

## Strategic Research

### CNCF Kubernetes AI Conformance

The [CNCF Kubernetes AI Conformance Program](https://www.cncf.io/blog/2025/01/15/introducing-the-kubernetes-ai-conformance-program/) establishes standards for AI/ML workload portability across Kubernetes platforms. Only platforms meeting these standards should be supported, ensuring workloads can interoperate as flexible nodes within a broader state/federal ecosystem.

**Current Platform Conformance:**

- AWS EKS meets proposed standards: [k8s-ai-conformance EKS](https://github.com/cncf-ai/k8s-ai-conformance/blob/main/v1.34/eks/PRODUCT.yaml), [AI on EKS](https://awslabs.github.io/data-on-eks/docs/ai-ml/trainium)

**HPC Requirements:**

Physical infrastructure for HPC projects must meet CNCF Kubernetes AI Conformance capabilities. This ensures models developed on local compute can scale to centralised HPC facilities without environment mismatches. Target sovereign Australian platforms meeting security and privacy requirements (ASD IRAP, PRIS).

### Digital Sovereignty

Analysis like [Cloud services and government digital sovereignty in Australia and beyond. / Mitchell, Andrew D.; Samlidis, Theodore.](https://research.monash.edu/en/publications/cloud-services-and-government-digital-sovereignty-in-australia-an/) in the [International Journal of Law and Information Technology, Vol. 29, No. 4, 2021, p. 364-394](https://academic.oup.com/ijlit/issue/29/4) highlights the ongoing issues with depending on hyperscalers in a single foreign jurisdiction. Based on this changing landscape, exploring simplified options for secure sovereign owned hosting options such as [Australian Dedicated Servers](https://www.micron21.com/enterprise/dedicated-servers) and [local colo](https://www.hostingcertification.gov.au/certified-service-providers) in Tier 3+ datacentres (designed for 99.98% uptime) is warranted and touched on below.

### Bare metal management

Use a platform like [Proxmox VE](https://www.proxmox.com/en/products/proxmox-virtual-environment/overview) to run standalone clusters at multiple facilities with multiple 2U servers per location. Example hardware (starts approx $15k AUD per server) - [Dell PowerEdge R7725](https://www.dell.com/en-au/shop/cty/pdp/spd/poweredge-r7725), [HPE ProLiant DL385 Gen11](https://www.hpe.com/au/en/hpe-proliant-dl385-gen11.html), [Lenovo ThinkSystem SR665 V3](https://www.lenovo.com/au/en/p/servers-storage/servers/racks/thinksystem-sr665-v3/len21ts0009)

Year 1 estimated costs:
- Hardware: ~$200k for 6x ~$33k servers
- Colo (2 sites, Tier 3+): [~$50k for 2x 5kw racks](https://www.micron21.com/enterprise/colocation-full-rack-pricing) with 1 Gbit IP Transit
- Total: $250k for ~2-3TB ram, ~500 cores, 100TB disk across 2 sites (reduce by a factor of 2-3 for redundancy)
